# Unsupervised-Stool-Sample-Analysis-in-Hepatic-Encephalopathy-

Liver cirrhosis is a condition where a patient’s liver is damaged. This damage is permanent and if severe enough can make a transplant the only treatment option [1]. Along with damage to the liver, some cirrhosis patients have an accumulation of toxins in the brain known as hepatic encephalopathy (referred to as HE) [2]. Researchers are trying to determine the relationship between the condition of the digestive system and HE. In this project you will investigate the relationship between the microbial composition of the digestive tract and HE. 

The gut-brain axis refers to the communication and influence between the brain and microbes in the gut [3]. This is particularly interesting because acquiring data pertaining to the gut is less difficult than gathering information on the makeup and function of the brain. Although there is strong evidence of such a connection between the brain and the gut, the exact influences they have on each other is not fully known [3].  
 
 We will be studying this connection in the context of Hepatic Encephalopathy, which is a condition in the brain that results from liver cirrhosis. A recent investigation of the gut-brain axis identified key microbes in the gut connected to Schizophrenia in the brain [4]. In that study, it was found that the abundance of different groups of microbes may change in varying ways; some may increase while others decrease, and many do not change at all.  
 
Raw data on the microbes in the gut are the genetic sequences present in the sample – however, for our analysis, we will assume that the sequences have been analyzed in order to identify the individual microbes. At this stage, the data is usually provided in the format of relative abundance. For a given sample, the relative abundance of each microbe is the proportion of the amount of that microbe to the total amount of all microbes present. Since stool is a product of the digestive tract, we can analyze stool samples to understand the microbes present in the patient’s gut.  
 
In this project, we will study relative abundance data for microbes in stool samples collected from two sets of patients: those with cirrhosis but not HE (HE0 population), and those with cirrhosis who have developed HE (HE1 populations). We want to identify microbes with significantly altered abundance levels between both populations and the ways in which these abundance levels change. Although such results will not directly answer the question of how HE develops in cirrhosis patients, they can help scientists and doctors to better direct their experimentation on how to map out the gut-brain axis. 
